Originally alphabets were written entirely in majuscule
letters, spaced between well-deﬁned upper and lower
bounds. When written quickly with a pen, these tended
to turn into rounder and much simpler forms. It is from
these that the ﬁrst minuscule hands developed, the
half-uncials and cursive minuscule, which no longer
stayed bound between a pair of |ines.[14] These in turn
formed the foundations for the Carolingian minuscule
script, developed by Alcuin for use in the court of Charle-
magne, which quickly spread across Europe. The
advantage of the minuscule over majuscule was
improved, faster readability.

In Latin, papyri from Herculaneum dating before 79
AD (when it was destroyed) have been found that have
been written in old Roman cursive, where the early
forms of minuscule letters  "h" and  for example,
can already be recognized. According to papyro|ogy’s
Knut Kleve, "The theonr, then, that the lower-case letters
have been developed from the ﬁﬂh century uncials and
the ninth century Carolingian minuscule seems to be
wrong."[15] Both majuscule and minuscule letters
existed, but the difference between the two variants was
initially stylistic rather than orthographic and the writing
system was still basically unicameralz a given handwrit-
ten document could use either one style or the other but
these were not mixed. European languages, except for
Ancient Greek and Latin, did not make the case distinc-
tion before about 1300.

The timeline of writing in Western Europe can be divided
into four eras:

- Greek majuscule (9th—3rd century BC) in contrast to
the Greek uncial script (3rd century BC — 12th centunr
AD) and the later Greek minuscule

- Roman majuscule (7th century BC —4th centuryAD) in
contrast to the Roman uncial (4th—8th century BC),Ro-
man Half Uncial, and minuscule

- Carolingian majuscule (4th—8th century AD) in contrast
to the Carolingian minuscule (around 780 —12th
century)

- Gothic majuscule (13th and 14th century), in contrast
to the early Gothic (end of 11th to 13th centunr),
Gothic (14th century), and late Gothic (16th century)
minuscule.

Traditionally, certain letters were rendered differently
according to a set of rules. In particular, those letters that
began sentences or nouns were made larger and often
written in a distinct script. There was no ﬁxed capitaliza-
tion system until the early 18th century. The English
language eventually dropped the rule for nouns, while
the German language kept it. Similar developments have
taken place in other alphabets. The lower-case script for
the Greek alphabet has its origins in the 7th centunr and
acquired its quadrilinear form in the 8th centunr. Over
time, uncial letterforms were increasingly mixed into the
script. The earliest dated Greek lower-case text is the
Uspenski Gospels (MS 461) in the year 835.

